DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
                                    Syllabus Fall 2025                              
                             Harvard Kennedy School of Government                   
                                                                                    
                                    Harvard University                              
                                                                                    
                  ECONOMIC   DEVELOPMENT:   THEORY  AND  EVIDENCE                   
                                       DEV-101                                      
                                                                                    
                      Class in Fall 2025: Mon/Wed, 10:30-11:45am, in WEX-332        
                  Review Sessions: Wed, 3:00-4:15pm in L-280, and 6:00-7:15pm in R-304
                                                                                    
                          *First day of class is Friday, September 5, 2025

| Faculty | Professor Eliana La Ferrara Office hours: Wednesdays, 4:00-6:00pm, or by appointment (sign up here for Professor La Ferrara) Assistant: Christine Dziuba, christine_dziuba@hks.harvard.edu | Professor Dani Rodrik Office hours: Tuesdays, 12:45-2:45pm, or by appointment (sign up here for Professor Rodrik) Assistant: Jessica De Simone, jessica_de_simone@hks.harvard.edu |
| --- | --- | --- |

COURSE  INFORMATION                                                          
       DEV-101 is a semester-long course that evaluates theories of economic development and scrutinizes
       empirical evidence to understand key features of the economic development processes across countries. The
       course will utilize analytical frameworks, grounded in economic theory, to examine the determinants of factor
       accumulation by individuals, firms and societies, and productivity and efficiency of resource allocation across
       activities and time. Drawing on empirical evidence and country illustrations, we will evaluate the relevance of
       these frameworks for diagnosing root causes of economic development and to develop an understanding of
       how the judicious use of theory and empirics can provide guidance for economic policy reforms. The course
       is organized along the following broad sections: (i) a methodological overview, with an emphasis on
       analytical frameworks for understanding economic growth, factor accumulation and institutional outcomes;
       (ii)an historical overview of comparative economic development, with focus on the Industrial Revolution, the
       Great Divergence, and colonialism; (iii) an analysis of individual decision-making in relevant domains,
       including the economics of the family, the determinants and returns to investment in human capital (health
                                                                                    
       and education), and financial capital (credit markets, savings behavior), and constraints to factor
       accumulation; (iv) determinants of productivity, with emphasis on resource misallocation within and across
       households/firms, poverty traps, learning and coordination and their impacts on productivity; (v) principles of
       economic reform and introduction to policy design; and (vi) the role of political factors and social norms in
       development.                                                                 
                                                                                    
       Teaching Fellow Email                     Office Hours

|  |  | Please see Canvas |
| --- | --- | --- |

Please see Canvas                 
       Course Assistants Email                   Office Hours

|  |  | Please see Canvas |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Please see Canvas |
|  |  | Please see Canvas |

Please see Canvas                 
                                                                            1

---
*Page 2*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       COURSE  REQUIREMENTS    AND GRADING                                          
                                                                                    
       Eligibility                                                                  
                                                                                    
       The class is a core requirement for students in the MPA/ID program. Non-MPA/ID students will not
       be admitted to the course. Auditors are not allowed.                         
                                                                                    
       Pre-requisites                                                               
       Students will be assumed to have basic familiarity with empirical methods of regression analysis and
       impact evaluation (e.g., difference-in-differences, instrumental variables, randomized controlled trials).
       For those who would like to review these methods at a very basic level (more will be done in other core
       courses), the following readings constitute useful background:               
           Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2014. Mastering'metrics: The path from cause to effect,
            Princeton University Press, (selected chapters).                        
           Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens. 2017. “The State of Applied Econometrics: Causality and Policy
            Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31 (2): 3-32.            
           Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer. 2007. “Using Randomization in Development
            Economics Research: A Toolkit,” Chapter 61 in T. Paul Schultz and John Strauss eds., Handbook of
            Development Economics, 4, North Holland, pp. 3895-3962.                 
                                                                                    
       General requirements                                                         
       Students are expected to prepare for each class by doing the required readings (see below), available on
                                                                                    
       Canvas. Students are expected to arrive on time so that they are seated and ready for the class to begin
       promptly at the 10:30am start time. To minimize distractions in the classroom, tablets and other devices
       that lay flat on desks are allowed; laptops are not allowed. In this classroom, we follow the non-
       attribution rule. You can share in a general way what you learned, but not who said what, without
       expressed permission. This does not apply to professors or guest speakers, whose comments are on the
       record.                                                                      
                                                                                    
       Grading rubric

| Component Grade x Unit Total Grade |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Assignments |  | 15 x 2 30 |
|  | Midterm |  | 30 |
|  | Final |  | 40 |
|  | Total |  | 100 |

Total                       100                                             
       Assignments and exams                                                        
       The assignments and exams will test understanding of concepts taught in class lectures, discussions, and
       required readings, and the ability to apply these insights to policy situations. We will have two long
       assignments, which must be submitted online on Canvas before the scheduled time. One point per 24-
                                                                                    
       hour period will be deducted for late assignments. (However, if you face technical difficulties in
       submitting then get in touch with the teaching team immediately.)            
                                                                                    
       Regrading policy                                                             
       On receiving your exam or assignment score, look carefully through the suggested answers and
       comments provided by the teaching team. Students who still wish to submit their answer sheets for
       regrading, should write a detailed email to the teaching team explaining their reason to contest a score
       within one week from the date that the graded assignment is returned to the class. The teaching team
       will assign a different grader from the original one and re-evaluate the entire assignment/exam and
                                                                                    
                                                                            2

---
*Page 3*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       determine whether a change in points is mandated across any question, including the ones not
       highlighted/contested by the student. This process may take up to a week and the outcome will be
                                                                                    
       final. Keep in mind, that the teaching team puts in a great deal of thought and effort in their
       assessments, and you are encouraged to be cautious/prudent in raising a re-grading issue.
                                                                                    
       Academic integrity                                                           
       Students are encouraged to work together and discuss class material and assignments. What is important
       is the eventual understanding of material achieved, and less about how that is achieved. Any exam,
       paper or assignment you submit is presumed to be your own original work, so if you do – as you will –
       use words or ideas written by other people, please make sure to cite these appropriately, and to indicate
       other students with whom you have collaborated. In addition to syllabus policies, students are subject to
       the Academic Code in the HKS Student Handbook.                               
                                                                                    
       Generative AI Policy                                                         
       Faculty and practitioners in this field are figuring out how (and how not) to use emerging generative AI
       tools such as ChatGPT Edu. These tools can save time and expand access to information. However, our
       goal is the development and deployment of valuable skills; reliance on generative AI tools can limit the
       building of those skills and make evaluation of work difficult. For this reason, this class allows some
       uses of AI and prohibits other uses:                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       Permitted uses of AI in DEV-101:                                             
          • Doing research with AI-powered search, for sources or examples          
          • Using AI as a brainstorm partner to come up with multiple rounds of ideas and refine them
          • Generating/editing code or seeking technical help with R, Excel formulas, Python, or other languages
          • Discussing a course concept with AI, or checking that your understanding is correct
          • Use AI to check and suggest fixes to grammar and spelling               
                                                                                    
       Prohibited uses of AI in DEV-101:                                            
          • Using AI to summarize readings                                          
          • Using AI to clean up a data set or generate summary statistics          
          • Inserting a homework question directly into AI and submitting the output
          • Using AI to suggest the steps for analysis or interpretation            
          • Asking an AI tool to suggest conclusions or recommendations from evidence
          • Asking an AI tool to check or critique an analysis or interpretation.   
          • Using AI to outline / plan out a paper, memo, speech or other communication
          • Using AI to write or rewrite a paper, memo, speech or other communication
          • Using AI to critique a draft of a written work product or suggest revisions
          • Using AI to create slides                                               
          • Using AI to generate visualizations, charts, or images                  
          • Using AI to articulate arguments for/against a position                 
          • Using AI in any capacity during the midterm and final exams             
                                                                                    
       Important: If you choose to employ AI for the allowed uses above, you are required to cite it as a
       reference as you would with any other source. You should also note that AI is not always a reliable
       source, and you are responsible for verifying any fact or argument you report in your assignments. If
                                                                                    
       you have any doubt about whether a specific use of generative AI is permitted, you should discuss it
       with your instructor prior to using it. These tools are changing rapidly, and we anticipate this policy will
       evolve alongside advancements in AI, with feedback from students and instructors.
                                                                                    
                                                                            3

---
*Page 4*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       TF review sessions                                                           
                                                                                    
       The live review sessions will go over concepts covered in class that may need more
       elaboration/discussion. As and when required, they will cover short summaries of additional empirical
       work that is closely related to what we have studied and can help in expanding your knowledge base.
       The additional material covered can enrich your responses to questions in the exams or problem sets, but
       it will not be directly tested upon and you are not required to read the papers on which it will be based.
       The TF will hold office hours, in case any students would like to go over session content.
                                                                                    
       READING  LIST INFORMATION                                                    
       The reading list below includes the URLs for those papers that can be downloaded from the internet.
       The majority of the papers and articles for this course are available on the Canvas site. If the links
       become broken, then you can find the articles by searching Harvard library’s e-Journals using the
       following link: http://sfx.hul.harvard.edu/sfx_local/az/. Type in the journal name and select a database
       that has issues for the year of the article. Each database is set up differently, but the citation will have all
       the information necessary to obtain the article.                             
                                                                                    
       Required readings for this course include readings that are available on the class page on Canvas and
       readings from the book below that is available on digital reserves through the HKS library or for
                                                                                    
       purchase at the Coop.                                                        
          • Koyama, Mark, and Jared Rubin. How the World Became Rich: The Historical Origins of Economic
            Growth, Polity Press, 2022.                                             
       Please check Canvas frequently for announcements and other information.      
                                                                                    
       Readings marked with ** are required readings for this class. These are usually papers that set the tone
       for a module or provide an overarching understanding of the material that will be covered in class.
       Readings with * are readings that are strongly recommended; these will deepen your understanding of
       the material and will provide you with additional material you can use in writing better answers in
       exams. Some readings without any stars may also be referred to in the lectures or review sessions. These
       papers may be important examples of the material being discussed and contribute towards enriching
                                                                                    
       your knowledge on the topic. While you don’t need to read these papers, you will be expected to know
       their content to the extent that is covered in the lectures and review sessions. Keep in mind that the goal
       of the syllabus is to create a resource for you that you can use to extend the breadth and depth of your
       knowledge on development economics throughout your MPA/ID studies and beyond.
                                                                                    
       Accessibility and Accommodations for Student Learning                        
       Harvard University values inclusive excellence and providing equal educational opportunities for all
       students. Our goal is to remove barriers for disabled students related to inaccessible elements of
       instruction or design in this course. If reasonable accommodations are necessary to provide access,
       please contact the local disability coordinator, Melissa Wojciechowski St. John
       (melissa_wojciechowski@hks.harvard.edu). She is the Senior Director of Student Services in the HKS
       Office of Student Services. Accommodations do not alter fundamental requirements of the course and
       are not retroactive. Students should request accommodations as early as possible, since they may take
       time to implement. Students should notify Melissa at any time during the semester if adjustments to their
       communicated accommodation plan are needed.                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            4

---
*Page 5*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
                      IMPORTANT  DATES  AND COURSE  STRUCTURE                       
                                                                                    
       Part 1: Introduction and Framework

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Fri | Sept 5 | Stylized facts of economic development | DR |
| 2 | Mon | Sept 8 | Doing development policy: The diagnostic approach | DR |
| 3 | Wed | Sept 10 | Understanding productivity | DR |

3   Wed   Sept 10 Understanding productivity                     DR         
       Part 2: History and Comparative Development

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 4 | Mon | Sept 15 | The Industrial Revolution and its sources | DR |
| 5 | Wed | Sept 17 | Colonialism, the great divergence, and its present-day ramifications | DR |
| 6 | Mon | Sept 22 | Recent patterns of economic growth in the developing world | DR |
| 7 | Wed | Sept 24 | From macro- to micro-development: The role of policy evaluation Assignment #1 –due at 8:30am | ELF |

Assignment #1 –due at 8:30am                                
       Part 3: Understanding Household Decisions

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 8 | Mon | Sep 29 | Economics of the family | ELF |

8   Mon   Sep 29 Economics of the family                         ELF        
       Part 4: Factor Accumulation

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 9 | Wed | Oct 1 | Human capital: Education (1) | ELF |
| 10 | Mon | Oct 6 | Human capital: Education (2) | ELF |
| 11 | Wed | Oct 8 | Human capital: Marriage and fertility | ELF |
| 12 | Wed | Oct 15 | Human capital: Health | ELF |
| 13 | Mon | Oct 20 | MIDTERM EXAM |  |
| 14 | Wed | Oct 22 | Physical capital: Investment, intermediation, and saving (1) | ELF |
| 15 | Mon | Oct 27 | Physical capital: Investment, intermediation, and saving (2) | ELF |

15  Mon   Oct 27 Physical capital: Investment, intermediation, and saving (2) ELF
       Part 5: Productivity Growth

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 16 | Wed | Oct 29 | Misallocation, learning, and coordination failures (1) | DR |
| 17 | Mon | Nov 3 | Misallocation, learning, and coordination failures (2) | DR |
| 18 | Wed | Nov 5 | Agriculture (1) | ELF |
| 19 | Mon | Nov 10 | Agriculture (2) | ELF |
| 20 | Wed | Nov 12 | Productive development policies | DR |

20  Wed   Nov 12 Productive development policies                 DR         
       Part 6: Economic Reform, Political and Social Constraints

| No. | Day | Date | Topic | Lecturer |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 21 | Mon | Nov 17 | Analytics of economic reform: Theory of second best Assignment #2 –due at 8:30am | DR |
| 22 | Wed | Nov 19 | Poverty traps | ELF |
| 23 | Mon | Nov 24 | Political economy | DR |
| 24 | Mon | Dec 1 | Social norms | ELF |
| 25 | Wed | Dec 3 | General discussion and wrap-up | ELF |
|  | Wed | Dec 10 | FINAL EXAM (9am-12pm) |  |

Wed   Dec 10 FINAL EXAM (9am-12pm)                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            5

---
*Page 6*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
                           COURSE OUTLINE  AND  READINGS*                           
                                                                                    
                              *tentative and subject to change                      
                                                                                    
       ** = required readings (before lecture); * = strongly recommended readings;  
       no stars = additional reading for further background                         
                                                                                    
       Most required readings are available online (by clicking on the title). Required readings that are not
       linked in this syllabus can be found on Canvas.                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       PART  1: INTRODUCTION  AND FRAMEWORK                                         
                                                                                    
       1. Stylized facts of economic development (Sept 5, DR)                       
           ** Roser, Max. 2023. “Extreme poverty: How far have we come, and how far do we still have to go?”
            Published online at OurWorldInData.org, August 27, 2023.                
                                                                                    
           ** Chandy, Laurence. 2023. “Economic Development in an Era of Climate Change,” Carnegie
            Endowment for International Peace, January 2023.                        
           Page, Lucy and Rohini Pande. 2018. “Ending Global Poverty: Why money isn’t enough,” Journal of
            Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 173-200.                                  
           Filippini, Federico and Eduardo Levy Yeyati. 2022. “Pandemic Divergence: A Short Note on COVID-19
            and Global Income Inequality.” Brookings Global Working Paper 168, March.
                                                                                    
           Carolina Diaz-Bonilla et al., “April 2024 Update to the Multidimensional Poverty Measure: What’s
            New,” Global Poverty Monitoring Technical Note 38, World Bank, June 2024.
           Mkandawire, Thandika. 2010. “How the New Poverty Agenda Neglected Social and Employment
            Policies in Africa.” Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 11(1): 37-55.
                                                                                    
           Milanovic, Branko. 2021. “After the financial crisis: the evolution of the global income distribution
            between 2008 and 2013,” Review of Income and Wealth, 68 (1): 43-73.     
           Rodrik, Dani, 2015. Economics Rules: The Rights and Wrongs of the Dismal Science, W.W. Norton,
            chaps. 1-4.                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       2. Doing development policy: The diagnostic approach (Sept 8, DR)            
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2010. “Diagnostics before Prescription,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3): 33-
            44.                                                                     
                                                                                    
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2009. “The New Development Economics: We Shall Experiment, but How Shall we
            Learn?” in J. Cohen and W. Easterly, eds., What Works in Development? Thinking Big and Thinking
            Small, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.                     
           * Gelman, Andrew, and Guido Imbens. 2013. “Why Ask Why: Forward Causal Inference and Reverse
            Causal Questions.” NBER Working Paper 19614.                            
                                                                                    
           Thorbecke, Erik. 2019. “The History and Evolution of the Development Doctrine, 1950-2017,” in M.
            Nissanke and J. Ocampo, eds., The Palgrave Handbook of Development Economics, 61-108.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            6

---
*Page 7*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       3. Understanding productivity (Sept 10, DR)                                  
           ** Jones, Charles I. 2015. “The Facts of Economic Growth.” NBER Working Paper No. 21142.
                                                                                    
           ** Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” chapter 9 in P. Aghion
            and S. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, 1A. North Holland. Please read only pp. 680-690,
            717-724.                                                                
           * Barro, Robert J. 1999. “Notes on Growth Accounting,” Journal of Economic Growth, 4: 119-137.
                                                                                    
           Conference Board, Total Economy Database, Growth Accounting and Total Factor Productivity, 1990-
            2019. (This is a database. Look at and understand the growth decompositions for four countries that
            interest you.)                                                          
           Bosworth, Barry and Susan M. Collins. 2003. “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” Brookings Papers
            on Economic Activity, 2: 113-206.                                       
           Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
            Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83-116.    
                                                                                    
           Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. 2007. “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” American
            Economic Review, 97(3): 562-585.                                        
           Felipe, Jesus and John McCombie. 2017. “The Debate about the Sources of Growth in East Asia after a
            Quarter of a Century: much ado about nothing,” Asian Development Bank, Working Paper No. 512.
                                                                                    
           Clemens, Michael, Claudio Montenegro and Lant Pritchett. 2009. “The Place Premium: Wage
            Differences for Identical Workers Across the US Border.” World Development Bank Report Background
            Paper.                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       PART  2: HISTORY AND COMPARATIVE   DEVELOPMENT                               
                                                                                    
       4. The Industrial Revolution and its sources (Sept 15, DR)                   
           ** Koyama, Mark, and Jared Rubin. How the World Became Rich: The Historical Origins of Economic
            Growth, Polity Press, 2022, chapters 2, 3, 4, and 8.                    
           Allen, Robert C. 2011. Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press,
            chapter 3: 27-39.                                                       
                                                                                    
           Mokyr, Joel. 2011. “The European Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution, and Modern Economic
            Growth,” in P. Zumbansen and G.P. Calliess, eds., Law, Economics and Evolutionary Theory. Edward
            Elgar Publishing.                                                       
           Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
            Institutional Change, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, 95(3): 546-579.
                                                                                    
           Mukherjee, Aditya. 2010. “Empire: How Colonial India Made Modern Britain.” Economic and Political
            Weekly, 45(50), December 11-17: 73-82.                                  
           Nicholas Crafts. 2021. “Understanding Productivity Growth in the Industrial Revolution.” Economic
            History Review, 74(2): 309–338.                                         
           Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
            Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
            117: 1231–9.                                                            
                                                                                    
           Clark, Gregory. 2007. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton University
            Press, chapters 10-13.                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            7

---
*Page 8*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       5. Colonialism, the great divergence, and its present-day ramifications (Sept 17, DR)
           ** Koyama, Mark, and Jared Rubin. How the World Became Rich: The Historical Origins of Economic
            Growth, Polity Press, 2022, chapter 6.                                  
                                                                                    
           ** Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of
            Development among New World Economies.” Economia, 3: 41–88. Please read only pp. 41-83.
           * Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long-Term Effects of Africa's Slave Trades.” Quarterly Journal of
            Economics. 2008; 123 (1): 139-176. Please read only pp. 139-144, 151-156, 163-169.
                                                                                    
           * Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
            Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review. 91: 1369–1401.
           * Dell, Melissa. 2010. “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita.” Econometrica, 78 (6), November:
            1863–1903.                                                              
           Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2005. “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The
            Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India.” The American Economic Review, 95 (4), September:
            1190-1213.                                                              
                                                                                    
           Iyer, Lakshmi. 2010. "Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences," The
            Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, 92 (4), November: 693-713.
           Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa.”
            American Economic Review. 101 (7): 3221-3252.                           
                                                                                    
           Pascali, Luigi. 2017. “The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic Development,”
            American Economic Review. 107 (9): 2821–2854.                           
           Conley, Timothy G. and Morgan Kelly. 2025. “The Standard Errors of Persistence.” Journal of
            International Economics. 153.                                           
           Court, Victor. 2019. “A reassessment of the Great Divergence debate: towards a reconciliation of
            apparently distinct determinants,” European Review of Economic History. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       6. Recent patterns of economic growth in the developing world (Sept 22, DR)  
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2014. “The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth,” in Franklin Allen et al.,
            Towards a Better Global Economy: Policy Implications for Citizens Worldwide in the 21st Century,
            Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.                           
           * Diao, Xinshen, Margaret McMillan, and Dani Rodrik. 2019. “The Recent Growth Boom in Developing
            Economies: A Structural-Change Perspective,” in M. Nissanke and J. Ocampo, eds., The Palgrave
            Handbook of Development Economics, 281-384.                             
                                                                                    
           * Kremer, Michael, Jack Willis, and Yang You. 2022. “Converging to Convergence.” NBER
            Macroeconomics Annual, 36: 337-412.                                     
           Thorbecke, Erik. 2019. “The History and Evolution of the Development Doctrine, 1950-2017,” in M.
            Nissanke and J. Ocampo, eds., The Palgrave Handbook of Development Economics, 61-108.
           Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and Michael Walker. 2022. “General
            Equilibrium Effects of Cash Transfers: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” Econometrica, 90 (6): 2603-
            2643.                                                                   
                                                                                    
           Rodrik, Dani. 2013. “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
            128 (1): 165-204.                                                       
           Rodrik, Dani. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 21: 1-33.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            8

---
*Page 9*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       7. From macro- to micro-development: The role of policy evaluation (Sept 24, ELF)
           ** Buera, F., J. Kaboski and R. Townsend. 2023. “From Micro to Macro Development,” Journal of
            Economic Literature, 61(2), 471-503.                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       PART  3: UNDERSTANDING  HOUSEHOLD   DECISIONS                                
                                                                                    
       8. Economics of the family (Sept 29, ELF)                                    
           ** Bardhan, P. and C. Udry (1999), “Household Economics,” ch. 2 in Development Microeconomics,
            Oxford University Press.                                                
           ** Duflo, E. (2003), “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold
            Allocation,” World Bank Economic Review, 17, 1-25.                      
                                                                                    
           Thomas, D. (1990). “Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach.” Journal of Human
            Resources, 25(4), 635-664.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       PART  4: FACTOR ACCUMULATION                                                 
                                                                                    
       9, 10. Human capital: Education (Oct 1-6, ELF)                               
           ** Beaman, Lori, et al. 2012. “Female Leadership Raises Aspirations and Educational Attainment for
            Girls: A Policy Experiment in India.” Science, 335 (6068): 582-586.     
                                                                                    
           ** Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
            Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review, 91 (4): 795-813.
           ** Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,” The
            Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (2): 515-548.                       
           Ashraf, N. N. Bau, C. Low and K. McGinn (2020), “Negotiating a Better Future: How Interpersonal
            Skills Facilitate Intergenerational Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1095-1151.
                                                                                    
           Dizon-Ross, Rebecca. 2019. “Parents' Beliefs about their Children's Academic Ability: Implications for
            Educational Investments.” American Economic Review, 109 (8): 2728-65.   
           Field, Erica, and Attila Ambrus. 2008. “Early Marriage, Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling
            Attainment in Bangladesh.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (5): 881-930.
                                                                                    
           Kremer, Michael, Conner Brannen, and Rachel Glennerster. 2013. “The Challenge of Education and
            Learning in the Developing World.” Science, 340 (6130): 297-300.        
           Oster, Emily, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2013. “Do IT Service Centers Promote School Enrollment?
            Evidence from India.” Journal of Development Economics, 104: 123-135.   
           Riley, Emma. 2024. “Role models in Movies: The Impact of Queen of Katwe on Students' Educational
                                                                                    
            Attainment.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 106 (2): 334-351.  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       11. Human capital: Marriage and fertility (Oct 8, ELF)                       
           ** La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea. 2012. “Soap Operas and Fertility: Evidence
            from Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4): 1-31. 
           * Corno, L., N. Hildebrandt and A. Voena (2020), “Age of Marriage, Weather Shocks, and the Direction
            of Marriage Payments,” Econometrica, 879-915.                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                            9

---
*Page 10*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
           * Bau, N., D. Henning, C. Low, and B. Steinberg (2024), “Family Planning, Now and Later: Infertility
            Fears and Contraceptive Take-Up”, NBER Working Paper 32735.             
                                                                                    
           Buchmann, N., E. Field, R. Glennerster, S. Nazneen, X. Wang. 2023. “A Signal to End Child Marriage:
            Theory and Experimental Evidence from Bangladesh,” American Economic Review, 113 (10): 2645-2688.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       12 . Human capital: Health (Oct 15, ELF)                                     
           ** Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in
            the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72 (1): 159-217.
           * Dupas, P. (2014), “Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products: Evidence
                                                                                    
            from a Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 82(1), 197-28. Sections 1, 2, 3 only.
           Kremer, Michael, and Rachel Glennerster. 2011. “Improving Health in Developing Countries: Evidence
            from Randomized Evaluations,” in Handbook of Health Economics, 2, Elsevier, ch. 4, pp. 201-315.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       13. MIDTERM EXAM (October 20)                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       14, 15. Physical capital: Investment, intermediation and savings (Oct 22-27, ELF)
                                                                                    
         Credit markets                                                             
           ** De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
            Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (4):
            1329-1372.                                                              
                                                                                    
           * Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Morduch. 2010. “Access to Finance.” Handbook of Development
            Economics, 5, Elsevier, pp. 4703-4784.                                  
           * Ghatak, Maitreesh. 1999. “Group Lending, Local Information and Peer Selection.” Journal of
            Development Economics, 60 (1): 27-50.                                   
           J-PAL. 2015. “Where Credit is Due,” Policy Bulletin.                    
                                                                                    
           Banerjee, Abhijit, et al. 2015. “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.”
            American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7 (1): 22-53.             
           Feigenberg, Benjamin, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande. 2013. “The Economic Returns to Social
            Interaction: Experimental Evidence from Microfinance.” Review of Economic Studies, 80 (4): 1459-1483.
                                                                                    
           Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information
            Asymmetries with a Consumer Credit Field Experiment.” Econometrica, 77 (6): 1993-2008.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       PART  5: PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH                                                 
                                                                                    
       16. Misallocation, learning and coordination failures I (Oct 29, DR)         
           ** Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
            India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4): 1403-1448. Please read only pp. 1403-1411, 1414-
            1426.                                                                   
                                                                                    
           ** McMillan, Margaret, and Dani Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity
            Growth,” in M. Bachetta and M. Jansen, eds., Making Globalization Socially Sustainable, International
            Labor Organization and World Trade Organization, Geneva. Please read only pp. 49-75.
                                                                           10

---
*Page 11*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
           * Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1992. “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
            Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2): 317-334. Please read only pp. 317-328.
                                                                                    
           de Vries, Klaas, and Marcel Timmer. 2015. “Structural Transformation in Africa: Static Gains, Dynamic
            Losses,” Journal of Development Studies, 51(6): 674-688.                
           Fentanes, Oscar, and Santiago Levy. 2023. “Nafta, Dysfunctional Firm Dynamics, and Mexico’s Dismal
            Productivity Performance,” unpublished paper, June 2023.                
           Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo. 2005. “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development
                                                                                    
            Economics,” chapter 7 in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, 1A, North
            Holland.                                                                
           Hicks, Joan Hamory, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Y. Li, and Edward Miguel. 2021. “Reevaluating
            Agricultural Productivity Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata,” Journal of the European Economic
            Association, 19(3): 1522-1555.                                          
           Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. “Cross-Country Differences in
            Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection,” American Economic Review, 103(1): 305-334.
                                                                                    
           Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2006. “Distance to Frontier, Selection, and
            Economic Growth,” Journal of European Economic Association, 4 (1): 37-74.
           Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008. “The Unequal Effects of
            Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” American Economic Review, 98(4):
            1397-1412.                                                              
           Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik. 2007. “What You Export Matters,” Journal of
                                                                                    
            Economic Growth, 12: 1-25.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       17. Misallocation, learning and coordination failures II (Nov 3, DR)         
           ** Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” Journal of
            Development Economics, 72(2): 603-633.                                  
           ** Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big
            Push,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(5): 1003-1026. Please read only pp. 1003-1013, 1019-1025.
                                                                                    
           Sabel, Charles and Piero Ghezzi. 2019. “Rethinking Informality,” unpublished paper.
           Magruder, Jeremy R. 2013. “Can Minimum Wages Cause a Big Push? Evidence from Indonesia,”
            Journal of Development Economics, 100(1): 48-62.                        
                                                                                    
           Rodrik, Dani. 1996. “Coordination Failures and Government Policy: A Model with Applications to East
            Asia and Eastern Europe,” Journal of International Economics, 40(1-2): 1-22.
           Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. 1943. “Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe,”
            Economic Journal, 53(210/211): 202-211.                                 
           Ulyssea, Gabriel, “Informality: Causes and Consequences for Development,” Annual Review of
            Economics, 2020, 12:525–46.                                             
                                                                                    
           Cusolito, Ana Paula, and William F. Maloney, Productivity Revisited: Shifting Paradigms in Analysis and
            Policy, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018.                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                           11

---
*Page 12*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       18, 19. Agriculture (Nov 5-10, ELF)                                          
           ** Ray, Debraj. 1998. “Land.” in Development Economics, Princeton University Press. Chapter 12.

| * Le Rossignol, Etienne, Sara Lowes and Eduardo Montero, 2025. “Fallow Lengths and the Structure of |
| --- |
| Property Rights.” Mimeo, UC San Diego. |

Property Rights.” Mimeo, UC San Diego.

| Beaman, Lori, et al. 2021. “Can Network Theory-Based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?” |
| --- |
| American Economic Review, 111 (6): 1918-43. |

American Economic Review, 111 (6): 1918-43.

| Burchardi, Konrad B., et al. 2019. “Moral Hazard: Experimental Evidence from Tenancy Contracts.” The |
| --- |
| Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (1): 281-347. |

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (1): 281-347.

| Cole, Shawn A., and A. Nilesh Fernando. 2021. “‘Mobile’izing Agricultural Advice Technology |
| --- |
| Adoption Diffusion and Sustainability.” The Economic Journal, 131 (633): 192-219. |

Adoption Diffusion and Sustainability.” The Economic Journal, 131 (633): 192-219.

| Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Udry. 2010. “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in |
| --- |
| Ghana.” American Economic Review, 100 (1): 35-69. |

Ghana.” American Economic Review, 100 (1): 35-69.

| Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. 2008. “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural |
| --- |
| Investment in Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (6): 981-1022. |

Investment in Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (6): 981-1022.

| Gollin, Douglas. 2010. “Agricultural Productivity and Economic Growth.” in Handbook of Agricultural |
| --- |
| Economics, vol. 4: 3825-3866. Chapter 73. |

Economics, vol. 4: 3825-3866. Chapter 73.

| Moscona, Jacob and Karthik Sastry. 2025. “Inappropriate Technology: Evidence from Global |
| --- |
| Agriculture”, unpublished. |

Agriculture”, unpublished.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       20. Productive development policies (Nov 12, DR)                             
           ** Juhasz, Reka, Nathan Lane, and Dani Rodrik. 2024. “The New Economics of Industrial Policy,”
            Annual Review of Economics, 16 (1): 213-242.                            
           Rodrik, Dani, and Rohan Sandhu. 2024. “Servicing Development: Productive Upgrading of Labor-
            Absorbing Services in Developing Economies,” Global Policy, 16 (2): 306-318.
           Rodrik, Dani. 2019. “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” in One Economics, Many Recipes,
            Princeton University Press, Princeton, 99-152.                          
                                                                                    
           Liu, Ernest. 2019. “Industrial Policy in Production Networks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4):
            1883-1948.                                                              
           Criscuolo, Ciara, Ralf Martin, Henry G. Overman, John Van Reenen. 2019. “Some Causal Effects of an
            Industrial Policy,” American Economic Review, 109(1) January: 48-85.    
                                                                                    
           Lane, Nathan. 2025. “Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial Policy and Industrialization in South Korea.”
            Quarterly Journal of Economics, 140(3): 1683-1741.                      
           Kalouptsidi, Myrtro. 2018. “Detection and Impact of Industrial Subsidies: The Case of Chinese
            Shipbuilding,” Review of Economic Studies, 85: 1111-1158.               
           Sabel, Charles. 2012. “Self-Discovery as a Coordination Problem,” chap. 1 in C. Sabel et al., eds, Export
            Pioneers in Latin America, Inter-American Development Bank, 1-46.       
                                                                                    
           Inter-American Development Bank. 2014. Rethinking Productive Development: Sound Policies and
            Institutions for Economic Transformation, Washington, D.C.              
           Oqubay, Arkebe. 2019. “Industrial Policy and Late Industrialization in Ethiopia.” The Oxford Handbook
            of the Ethiopian Economy.                                               
                                                                                    
           Ghezzi, Piero. 2017. “Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru: Lessons for Productive Development Policies.” Global
            Policy, 8(3) September: 369-380.                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                           12

---
*Page 13*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
       PART  6: ECONOMIC REFORM,  POLITICAL  AND SOCIAL CONSTRAINTS                 
                                                                                    
       21. Analytics of economic reform: Theory of second best (Nov 17, DR)         
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2005. “Growth Strategies,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic
            Growth, 1A, North-Holland, pp. 967-1014.                                
                                                                                    
           * Rajan, Raghuram G., and Arvind Subramanian. 2011. “Aid, Dutch Disease, and Manufacturing
            Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 94(1): 106-118.              
           Lipsey, R. G., and Kelvin Lancaster, 1956-1957. “The General Theory of ‘Second Best.’” Review of
            Economic Studies, 24(1): 11-32.                                         
                                                                                    
           Rodrik, Dani. 2008. “Second-Best Institutions,” American Economic Review, 98 (2): 100-104.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       22. Poverty traps (Nov 19, ELF)                                              
           ** Balboni, Clare, et al. 2022. "Why Do People Stay Poor?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137
            (2): 785-844.                                                           
                                                                                    
           ** Mani, Anandi, et al. 2013. “Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function.” Science, 341 (6149): 976-980.
           Kaur, Supreet, et al. 2025. “Do Financial Concerns Make Workers Less Productive?” The Quarterly
            Journal of Economics, 140 (1): 635-689.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       23. Political economy (Nov 24, DR)                                           
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2008. “Thinking About Governance,” in Governance, Growth, and Development
            Decision-Making, reflections by D. North, D. Acemoglu, F. Fukuyama, and D. Rodrik, The World Bank.
           ** Rodrik, Dani. 2014. “When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, World Views, and Policy Innovations,”
            Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(1): 189–208.                       
                                                                                    
           ** Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2013. “Economics versus Politics: Pitfalls of Policy Advice,”
            Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(2): 173–192.                       
           * Olken, Ben and Rohini Pande. 2012. “Corruption in Developing Countries,” Annual Review of
            Economics, 4: 479-509.                                                  
           Grief, Avner. 2020. “Coercion and Exchange. How Did Markets Evolve?” in A. Greif, L. Kiesling and J.
                                                                                    
            Nye, eds., Institutions, Innovation, and Industrialization: Essays in Economic History and Development,
            Princeton University Press, pp. 71-96.                                  
           Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1989. “Markets, Market Failures, and Development,” American Economic Review,
            79(2): 197-203.                                                         
           Mukand, Sharun and Dani Rodrik. 2020. “The Political Economy of Liberal Democracy.” Economic
            Journal, 130:765-792.                                                   
                                                                                    
           Greif, Avner. 1989. “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders.”
            Journal of Economic History, 49(4): 857-82.                             
           Rodrik, Dani. 2000. "Institutions for High-Quality Growth: What They Are and How to Acquire Them,"
            Studies in Comparative International Development, 35(3).                
                                                                                    
           Stasavage, David et al. 2016. “Representation and Consent: Why They Arose in Europe and Not
            Elsewhere,” Annual Review of Political Science, 19: 145-162.            
           Campbell, John L. 2002. “Ideas, Politics, and Public Policy,” Annual Review of Sociology, 28: 21-38.
                                                                                    
                                                                           13

---
*Page 14*

DRAFT syllabus subject to change: August 19, 2025
           Mehta, Jal. 2011. “The Varied Roles of Ideas in Politics: From ‘Whether’ to ‘How’,” in Daniel Béland and
            Robert Henry Cox, eds., Ideas and Politics in Social Science Research, Oxford University Press: 23-46.
                                                                                    
           Stigler, George J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
            Management Science, 2(1): 3–21.                                         
           Krueger, Anne O. 1974. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,” American Economic
            Review, 64(3): 291-303.                                                 
           Leighton, Wayne and Edward López. 2013. Madmen, Intellectuals, and Academic Scribblers: The
                                                                                    
            Economic Engine of Political Change, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, chap. 6.
           Mukand, Sharun and Dani Rodrik. 2005. “In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence,
            Experimentation, and Economic Performance,” American Economic Review, 95(1): 374 – 83.
           Mehta, Pratap Bhanu and Michael Walton. 2014. “Ideas, interests and the politics of development change
            in India: capitalism, inclusion and the state,” ESID Working Paper No. 36.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       24. Social norms (Dec 1, ELF)                                                
           ** Bursztyn, Leonardo, Alessandra González and David Yanagizawa-Drott (2020), “Misperceived Social
            Norms: Women Working Outside the Home in Saudi Arabia,” American Economic Review, 110(10),
            2997-3029.                                                              
           * Ho, Lisa, Suhani Jalota and Anahita Karandikar (2025), “Bringing Work Home: Flexible Arrangements
            as Gateway Jobs for Women in West Bengal,” unpublished.                 
                                                                                    
           * Efferson, Charles et al. (2015). “Female genital cutting is not a social coordination norm.” Science,
            349(6255), 1446-1447.                                                   
           Bicchieri, Cristina, Ryan Muldoon, and Alessandro Sontuoso, “Social Norms,” The Stanford
            Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2018), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).               
           Gulesci, Selim et al. (2025), “A Stepping Stone Approach to Norm Transitions,” The American Economic
            Review, 115(7), 2237-2266.                                              
                                                                                    
           De Souza, P., S. Gulesci, E. La Ferrara, D. Smerdon, M. Sulaiman (2023), “Changing Harmful Norms
            through Information and Coordination: Experimental Evidence from Somalia,” unpublished.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       25. General discussion and wrap-up (Dec 3, ELF)                              
           Jonas Hjort, Diana Moreira, Gautam Rao, and Juan Santini (2021), “How Research Affects Policy:
            Experimental Evidence from 2,150 Brazilian Municipalities,” American Economic Review, 111(5).
                                                                                    
           Abhijit Banerjee, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji, Marc
            Shotland, and Michael Walton (2017), “From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies: Challenges and
            Solutions, with an Application,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4), 73–102.
           Vivalt, Eva (2020), “How Much Can We Generalize From Impact Evaluations?” Journal of the European
            Economic Association, 18(6), 3045–3089.                                 
           Chassang, S. and S. Kapon (2022), “Designing Randomized Controlled Trials with External Validity in
            Mind,” NBER Working Paper 30762.                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       FINAL EXAM (December 10)                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                           14